     HEXPLORE  is  an  intellectual  computer  game  for one
person, played on a picture shown at  the  computer  screen.
Or,  alternatively,  it can be viewed as a model of research
activity, where the researcher has to explore the game  area
in  order  to solve one of the two mutually exclusive tasks.
The whole picture from which the solution could be  seen  is
generated   at   random,  and  it  is  not  visible  to  the
researcher. At some moment, one of the two tasks may  appear
to have a better prospect, but the situation can be reversed
in a few steps, so it is not certain up to the  last  moment
which of the two tasks will actually be solved.

     Random choice of the disposition combined with  varying
decisions of the researcher lead to an inexhaustible variety
of situations, plans, and disappointments.


                         HOW TO PLAY

     Pictures  1  and  2 show some sample game areas as they
look when the game is over.

     The central part of the screen consists of  a  diamond-
shaped  area  covered  with  a  grid of hexagonal cells. The
areas at two opposite corners are of one color (say, black),
while  those  at  the  two  remaining corners are of another
color (say, white). The cells are randomly colored in one of
the two colors.

     A black path is a  sequence  of  adjacent  black  cells
connecting  the two black areas at the corners. Similarly, a
white path consists of adjacent white cells and connects the
two white corner areas.

     Picture 1 has a white path,  marked with grey dots.  It
has many more white paths,  but it doesn't matter much. What
is important is that the black cells at both  sides  of  the
white path are separated, so there cannot exist a black path
(if it existed it had to cross the white path).

     Likewise,  picture  2  has  a  black path, therefore it
cannot have a white path.

     It has been proved mathematically that every picture of
this  kind  has  either  a black or a white path. As we have
seen, there cannot be both paths simultaneously.

     Your task is to find a black path or a white path in  a
picture  randomly generated by the computer. You cannot know
in advance which path actually  exists.  You  even  are  not
allowed  to  see  the colors of the cells. Instead, they all
are shown grey, as in picture 3. The only thing you  can  do
is  to  select  a  cell  and ask the computer to display its
color. If all the cells had  been  inspected,  the  solution
would  be  obvious,  but  you  are  supposed  to  spare your
inquiries. If you follow some plan you will probably find  a
path  with  only a small number of questions with some parts
of the are area still uncolored. But remember that  you  can
never  be  sure before your path is completed, so you should
be ready to change your plans promptly.


                    STARTING THE PROGRAM

     Insert the  diskette  into  the  "A"  drive   of   your
computer, and turn on power. Wait for the program to display
the initial picture and then proceed  as  described  in  the
next section.

     If you  know  how  to  work  with  DOS  you   can   use
alternative  methods.  This  is  the  only  way  to use this
program when your "A" drive cannot accept the  diskette.  If
you  have  a  monochrome  display  with  a color adapter the
program will try to display a color  picture  and  you  will
probably  have problems adjusting the display to distinguish
between colors shown as shades of grey.  In this case it  is
better to run the program in black and white as shown below.

     Make the root directory of  the  diskette  the  current
directory,  or,  alternatively,  copy  the  contents  of the
diskette to  another  directory,  and  make  this  directory
current.  If  your  computer has a mouse make sure the mouse
driver is started; if it is not, run the command "mouse" (or
"gmouse", whichever succeeds). Then run "hexplore".

     You may supply additional parameters to  the "hexplore"
command,  which  allows you to choose the number of cells in
the game area and the colors.  The simplest way  is  to  run
"hexplore  NN",  NN  standing  for  a decimal integer (e.g.,
"hexplore 25"). Then the program will display the picture in
black  and white with the game area of NN times NN cells. NN
cannot exceed 32.

     Another way is to prepare a special configuration  file
with  a  detailed  list  of  parameters  (its  structure  is
discussed in a special section below); to use this file  you
have  to  append  its  name to the "hexplore" command (e.g.,
"hexplore mycolors").


                      USING THE PROGRAM

     When  the program has been started, the initial picture
appears on  the  screen.  The  top cell is marked with a dot
called cursor. The cursor can be freely moved with the mouse
or  with  the keys of the numeric keypad.  Pressing each key
will move the cursor to one of the adjacent cells  as  shown
below.

               ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿ ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿ ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
               ³   7   ³ ³   8   ³ ³   9   ³
               ³  TOP  ³ ³  TOP  ³ ³  TOP  ³
               ³  LEFT ³ ³       ³ ³ RIGHT ³
               ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ
               ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿ ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿ ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
               ³   4   ³ ³   5   ³ ³   6   ³
               ³       ³ ³       ³ ³       ³
               ³       ³ ³       ³ ³       ³
               ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ
               ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿ ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿ ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
               ³   1   ³ ³   2   ³ ³   3   ³
               ³BOTTOM ³ ³       ³ ³BOTTOM ³
               ³ LEFT  ³ ³BOTTOM ³ ³ RIGHT ³
               ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ
               ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿ ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
               ³        0        ³ ³   .   ³
               ³                 ³ ³       ³
               ³                 ³ ³       ³
               ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

(The keys marked 4, 5, 6, 0, and '.' have no  function.  The
NumLock light at the keyboard must be  off;  if  it  is  on,
hit the NumLock key.)

     To  find out the color of a cell, first bring there the
cursor and then confirm your choice  by  pressing  the  left
mouse  button  or,  alternatively,  the  Enter  key  at  the
keyboard (some keyboards have several Enter keys,  any  will
do).

     When  a sufficient number of cells have been colored to
form a path the program detects this condition and  displays
the path by marking its cells with cursor-like dots, and the
game is over.

     You can stop the game at any moment  by  pressing  both
left  and  right mouse buttons simultaneously, or by hitting
the Esc key. Do the same when you have  found  a  path.  The
picture   will   disappear,  and  some  statistics  will  be
displayed. You can start a new game  by  pressing  the  left
mouse  button or the Enter key. Alternatively, you can leave
the program completely (and enter DOS) by pressing once more
Esc or the two mouse buttons.

     Before  you  stop  the  game  you  can see the complete
picture with all the cells colored  and  the  shortest  path
displayed. If you have already found a path only corrections
will be displayed that make it shorter (or nothing at  all).
To  see  the complete picture press the "?" key (first press
Shift and hold it, then "?").


               BUILDING A CONFIGURATION FILE

     You can  modify  some  program   parameters   using   a
configuration file.  This  file  must  reside  in  the  same
directory as the program;  you may choose for  it  any  name
with an   extension   of   "cfg".   The   default   name  is
"hexplore.cfg" (it is used when no parameter is added to the
"hexplore" command).  To  use a different configuration file
(e.g., "mycolors.cfg") you have to append its  name (without
the extension)  to  the  command  (so  your  command will be
"hexplore mycolors").

     Use any text editor to create your  configuration file.
The  file  consists  just  of  a sequence of decimal numbers
separated by blank space.  You can find some sample files of
this type in your directory, their names are "hexplor1.cfg",
"hexplor2.cfg",  etc.;  these are used by the program if the
configuration  file  with the name specified does not exist,
which is the case when you  first  start  the  program.  The
numbers have the following meaning, in order:

     1. The number of cells in one row (if it is N the total
number  of  cells  is N squared).  The number must be in the
range from 2 to 32.  If 0 is specified the  program  selects
the number automatically.
     2. The display mode.  For some  types  of  displays  it
allows to select the screen resolution and/or palette. If -1
is specified the mode is  selected  automatically  (the  one
with the highest resolution).
     3. The color number of "grey" cells, i.e., of the cells
in the initial state.
     4. The  color number of the border of "grey" cells; the
same color is used for the cursor on these cells.
     5 and 6.  Similarly, the color numbers for the cells of
the first color (that in the upper left an the  lower  right
corners of the screen).
     7 and 8. The same for the second color (upper right and
lower left).
     9. Mouse sensitivity. The smaller the number the faster
the cursor moves. Find the best value experimentally.


                      THE MESSAGE FILE

     You can have the program messages (displayed at the end
of a  game)  in a language other than English.  To do it you
must build a special message file in the same directory. Its
name is  the  same  as for the configuration file except for
the extension which is "msg".  A  sample  message  file  for
Russian is  supplied as "russian.msg".  There is also a file
for English,  named "english.msg";  it is not  used  by  the
program but  can  serve  as a specimen for other such files.
You will see that the characters  "%d"  or  "%3d"  in  these
files stand for a number to be inserted by the program.

G.S.Tseytin, Leningrad University, 1990

Created with Turbo C 2.0,
     (c) 1987, 1988 by Borland International, Inc.
